Grab-and-Go Writing Activity: Writing More Descriptive, Specific Sentences Maria A.N. Judnick Department of English and Comparative Literature San José State University 

Timeframe: 20 minutes Materials needed (including preparation):   Text for the students to read and consider—“Snow” by Lee Martin is useful due to the simple yet evocative sentences in this short essay, but other descriptive, specific passages would work just as well.  Whiteboard markers or chalk to make the chart and have students write sample sentences on the board  Sample sentences handout (pulled from various grammar textbooks) for students to choose from to edit/improve by emulating the same techniques used in the model passage  A sample student paragraph from a current essay students are writing so the class can learn to edit their own work Objectives:  After the activity, students will be able to  identify and describe what makes a sentence, paragraph, or passage descriptive.  be able to imitate and discuss how to use these same ideas in their own work. Introduction: [2 minutes]  “How often have you gotten a comment from a peer editor or from a teacher asking you to be more specific?  Do you ever think that your writing seems a bit vague? It can be a struggle to figure out how much detail or description in a sentence is too much or not enough. How do you know how to describe something well? Today, we’re going to look at a very short piece and see how the writer Lee Martin has found a good balance between description and brevity in this essay that tells an entire story in just four paragraphs.  Let’s take a look.”  As you are speaking, pass out the reading handout.  

Procedures:  [12-15 minutes]  Step 1 [5 minutes]: Students will first read the passage silently to themselves, highlighting words that seem “descriptive” to them. After reading the passage again aloud, discuss impressions of the piece.   Drawing a chart (such as the one modeled below) on the board may spark a great discussion.  Key Words/Phrases Why are they important? 

While focusing on a few key words in the chart to help the class understand Martin’s description, here are some sample questions to ask: What’s the image evoked by the author using a Chevrolet pickup instead of some other model, like a sports car? Without the author specifically telling us, how can we guess that this story took place in a different time period?     Briefly discuss how these paragraphs can engage readers so quickly. Do you think Martin is “showing” or “telling” things to the reader? Why? [Time permitting, consider asking other potential discussion questions. What sentence first helped you figure out the underlying meaning of the passage? What image or idea stood out to you the most and why? What sensory details is the author using in his descriptions? Are these sentences elaborate? How would you describe Martin’s style?]   Step 2 [7 minutes]: Students are then given the handout with short, bland sentences and asked to take those same descriptive types of elements that Lee Martin used and edit/update/augment at least five of these examples. [Some students may choose to write a whole short paragraph based on one of the examples, and that’s an acceptable alternative.]   Step 3 [3 minutes]: Once students have finished editing their examples, they will share with a partner, and some students will be asked to share with the whole class by writing their sentences on the board. Classmates will be asked to comment on the improvements and changes made to the sentences.   Closure/Evaluation: [2-3 minutes]  Ask the students if they will ever use “nice” or “cool” or other vague words again in an essay.   Pass around a handout with a sample student paragraph that requires further description.  (Generally, this exercise is paired with a “Review” essay prompt, so I’ve selected a paragraph evaluating a particular product.) Students will edit several sentences for homework. 


Activity Analysis:  This activity can be useful at the beginning of the semester or school year to help students begin to experiment with their writing. Students can learn that a few well-chosen details can be more effective than relying on the thesaurus to come up with a “better” synonym. It is also helpful to remind students that using language that “shows” ideas rather than directly stating a concept is more interesting to the reader. Students tend not to have considered the connotations of common words and how they can create images in their minds. An additional follow-up exercise later in the unit is to have them learn how to edit overly wordy sentences to strike some balance in their work.  For some classes, time is a factor in this activity.  Some students struggle to edit five sentences in just seven minutes, so I occasionally offer just to edit two or three examples. Other classes can read the passage quite quickly and might benefit from additional examples. Writing More Descriptive Sentences: Model Directions: Read this short creative non-fiction piece and underline/highlight any of the descriptive words and phrases of this essay that stand out to you.   Add a star to what you think is the most important sentence in this short piece.   


Snow by Lee Martin Once, when I was five, a snow storm came overnight and lingered into the morning. We lived on the farm then, and for some reason I can’t recall, my mother and father set out up the lane in my father’s Chevrolet pickup, leaving me in the care of my grandmother. I dragged a ladder back chair to the front door and stood on it, so I’d be tall enough to look out the glass. I watched the back end of the truck slide a little in the deep snow before finding purchase and going on. My father turned onto the County Line Road, and I was still watching when the truck, nearly to the crossroads, slid into the ditch. I still remember the sight of my parents walking back up the lane, heads bent against the force of the snow, my mother’s scarf tied beneath her chin, the skirt of her dress flapping around her legs, the bill of my father’s cap dusted with snow, his cheeks red from the cold. Although I didn’t know it, then, this must have been one of the first times when I sensed that my parents lived inside imperfect bodies. They’d tried to move through space and failed. I didn’t know, as I felt the cold they carried back into our home, that this was only one of their many rehearsals for leaving this world. Now I think of their footprints in the lane, proof that they once walked upon this Earth— those footprints disappearing even as I celebrated my parents’ return, all sign of them filling in with snow. -- from Bending Genre: Essays on Creative Nonfiction 


Writing More Descriptive Sentences: Editing Exercises  You’ve read “Snow,” a short essay filled with simple, but evocative phrases and images. Now, let’s think about how we can incorporate those same ideas/feelings/moods into analytical writing by using adjectives, by “showing” specific details in a sentence, by incorporating similes and metaphors, etc. Pick at least five of the sentences below and make this idea more evocative, fresh, or appealing.  How can you help readers imagine what you are trying to describe?  Be careful not to overdescribe or simply list examples!  Original Edit Ex. My day was very busy. Due to an avalanche of work, I ate lunch at my desk today while catching up on my email.   1. My grandfather is funny.  2. My mother had a headache.  3. My friend makes me laugh.  4. He was nice.  5. The room was messy.  6. Her hairstyle is wild.  7. Our family vacation was a disaster.  8. Taking tests makes me nervous.  9. My father is a good man. 


10.  Lying is not a good idea.  11.  I was scared.  12.  The twins are completely  different from each other.  13.  She saw the car accident from the sidewalk.  14.  She takes things way too seriously.  15.  My dog is lazy.  Writing More Descriptive Sentences: Sample Student Essay Directions: Here is a sample review essay paragraph from a student outlining a menu option available at a local tea house. Identify sentences that you think could benefit from more specific and descriptive language. Underneath the paragraph, edit a few of these sentences using some of the same techniques we practiced.  As you read this sample, please edit for grammar as well.   


Sample: 1. Another famous plate is their toast. 2. I know that hearing the word “toast”, doesn’t sound appealing but their toast is a one of a kind. 3. The toast is special and unique compare to other toast that is made at home or other restaurant. 4 There are varieties of toast that contains with different topping, goodies, and fillings. 5. This toast certainly can make a unhappy person to smile once again. 6. The most popular one is called Macaroon Party. 7. It a cube of toast that have ice cream topping on it, macaroons on it, fruits, whip cream, and all other sort of goodies. 8. It makes you want to say wow and the first sight of it makes you want to stare at the beauty of the toast. 9. The toast gives a sweet taste and the combination of toast, filling, macaroon, and cream goes so well. 10. One plate of these can be shared with four people to eat. 11. The price for these toasts is around eight to ten dollars. 12. The price for a toast seems overboard, but for this toast it show why it is worth the money it deserves. 


Sentence #:   Edit:                            . Sentence #:   Edit:                            . Sentence #:   Edit:                            . Be prepared to discuss the following questions in class: Why did you make these changes? What idea/image were you most trying to convey in each sentence? Why? 



Descriptive writing creates a picture of a person, place, thing, or event. A well-written description should arouse a particular response or emotion in the reader's imagination.  Description tells what something looks, sounds, smells, tastes, or feels like. It works with all of the senses, i.e., Sight, smell, taste, touch, hearing.  Descriptive writing is the only type of writing which can be and should be used in all other forms: Expository, Narrative, and Persuasive.  Your goal as a writer is to describe something so well that your reader will see, in his or her imagination, what you have experienced in life!


Vivid sensory details-details appealing to one or more of the five senses. This is often best achieved by using vocabulary that includes specific nouns, active verbs, adjectives, and adverbs.  A clear, consistent organization using either  spatial, chronological, or thematic order.  To make an imaginary world seem real, an author often makes use of words and phrases that appeal to the senses. These words and phrases, are called images, and help a reader mentally experience what the characters in the literary selection are actually experiencing.


Before writing the Descriptive Essay, you have to think about 3W.  What, Why, and How. 1)What do you want to describe?  It’s an important step for you to know what are you describing:. a person , a place , a memory, an experience , an object .

2)Why are you writing your descriptive essay?  Usually, you have a particular reason why you need to write this descriptive essay.  Getting in touch with this reason can help you focus your description and imbue your language with a particular perspective or emotion.  Example  Imagine that you want to write a descriptive essay about your grandfather.  chose to write about his ◦ physical appearance ◦ the way that he interacts with people.  However, rather than providing a general description of these aspects, you want to convey ◦ your admiration for his strength ◦ kindness.  This is your reason for writing the descriptive essay.  To achieve this, you might focus one of your paragraphs on describing the roughness of his hands, roughness resulting from the labor of his work throughout his life, but you might also describe how he would hold your hands so gently with his rough hands when having a conversation with you or when taking a walk


3)How should you write your description?  As you write your descriptive essay, the best way to create a vivid experience for your readers is to focus on the five senses: sight, sound, smell, touch, taste.  When you focus your descriptions on the senses, you provide vivid and specific details that show your readers rather than tell your readers what you are describin


Good descriptive writing is comprised of five elements;  Sensory Details,  Figurative Language,  dominant impression,  precise language, and  Careful Organization. 



Elements of Descriptive Writing
1) Sensory Details  Good descriptive writing includes many vivid sensory details that paint a picture and appeals to all of the reader's senses of sight, hearing, touch, smell, and taste when appropriate. Descriptive writing may also paint a pictures of the feelings the person, place or thing invokes the writer. 2) Figurative Language  Good descriptive writing often makes use of figurative language to help paint the picture in the reader's mind. There are many ways to use figurative language, and it is a talent that should be practiced until perfected.                                                               -Asimile uses like or as to compare two unlike things. Example: Her smile was like sunshine. -Ametaphor compares two unlike things without using like or as: Example: Her smile was a light that lit up the room. -Personification suggests comparison between a nonliving thing and a person by giving the nonliving           thing human traits.

3) ADominant Impression  When you plan a descriptive essay, your focus on selecting details that help your readers see what you see, feel what you feel, and experience what you experience. Your goal is to create a single dominant impression, a central theme or idea to which all the details relate-for example, the liveliness of a street scene or the quiet of a summer night. This dominant impression unifies the description and gives readers an overall sense of what the person, place, object, or scene looks like(and perhaps what it sounds, smells, tastes, or feels like). Sometimes _ but not always_ your details will support a thesis making a point about the subject you are describing.

4) Precise language  Good descriptive writing uses precise language. Using specific words and phrases will help the reader “see” what you are describing. If a word or phrase is specific, it is exact and precise. The opposite of specific language is language that is vague, general, or fuzzy. 5) Careful Organization  Good descriptive writing is organized. Some ways to organize descriptive writing include: chronological (time), spatial (location), and order of importance.


Trasition words and phrases that signal description

 Transitions used in descriptive writing vary depending on whether you are describing a person, a place, or a thing. Here are some examples of transitions that might be used in descriptive contexts:


Types of descriptive writing
Descriptions of people or places : These portray the physical appearance of a person or place and show readers why the subject is important or special.  Remembrances : Capture a memorable experience in the writer’s life, either a specific moment or a longer period.  Observations : Describe an event the writer has witnessed.  Vignettes : Capture a single moment in the writer’s life, painting a picture with words


Structuring a descriptive essay
A descriptive essay simply describes something or someone by appealing to the reader’s senses: sight, sound, touch, smell and taste. Here are the basic steps to writing an effective descriptive essay: 1.  Select a subject Observation is the key to writing a good description. For example, if you are writing about a place, go there and take notes on the sights, sounds, and smells. A descriptive essay paints a picture for the reader, using descriptive devices and the senses. Create a thesis statement that informs the reader who or what you are describing. Examples: “The wooden roller coaster in Coney Island is a work of art.” “My bedroom is an ocean sanctuary.” 2.  Select dominant details Select only the details that support the dominant impression (your thesis statement). 3.  Organize details The paragraphs in a descriptive essay can be structured spatially (from top to bottom or from near to far) or chronologically (time order) or from general to specific. Descriptive essays can also use other patterns of organization such as narrative or exemplification. 4.  Use descriptive words Do not use vague words or generalities (such as good, nice, bad, or beautiful). Be specific and use sensory, descriptive words (adjectives). For example: I ate a good dinner. OR  I devoured a steaming hot, cheese-filled pepperoni pizza for dinner. Provide sensory details: Smells that are in the air (the aroma of freshly brewed coffee) Sounds (traffic, honking horns) Sights (“The sun scattered tiny diamonds across dew-covered grass as it peeked out from beyond the horizon.”) Touch (“The texture of the adobe hut’s walls resembled coarse sandpaper.”) Taste: sweet, sour, salty, bitter, tart (“Giant goose bumps formed on my tongue when I accidently bit into a sliver of lemon.”) 5.  Draw a logical conclusion The conclusion may also use descriptive words; however, make certain the conclusion is logical and


Quick Tips for Writing 
Planning your descriptive essay: ◦ What or who do you want to describe? ◦ What is your reason for writing your description? ◦ What are the particular qualities that you want to focus on?  Drafting your descriptive essay: ◦ What sights, sounds, smells, tastes, and textures are important for developing your description? ◦ Which details can you include to ensure that your readers gain a vivid impression imbued with your emotion or perspective?  Revising your descriptive essay: ◦ Have you provided enough details and descriptions to enable your readers to gain a complete and vivid perception? ◦ Have you left out any minor but important details? ◦ Have you used words that convey your emotion or perspective? ◦ Are there any unnecessary details in your description? ◦ Does each paragraph of your essay focus on one aspect of your description? ◦ Are you paragraphs ordered in the most affective way? 




Descriptive Writing - Top Grade
DESCRIPTIVE WRITING – TOP GRADE The superiorly thick smoky clouds rolled in like boulders, ready to crush anything in their way.  The darkness was engulfing and seemed to fully consume any spec of light.  Any last hope was gone… Without warning water came gushing down – throwing itself onto the gagged knife-like rocks. The rocks seemed to slice the water from its many thousands of sharp daggers, embedded all over it.  The water came gushing down like a waterfall along the jagged surface of the wise rock. The merciless winds caused the enormous waves to crash and erupt like lava coming down from a raging volcano.  It splits like an aggressive wild animal, angered by the vigorous storm.  The waves punching and beating the rocks with all of their might and the wind gusts knife the piercing thorns of branches. Branded upon the colossal tree trunk was a single blinding white light, which had cut through the immensely thick cloud and fog – like a laser.  Its source could vividly made out to be an inferior and small lighthouse, perched on the top of a cliff, which was like a bird sat upon its nest, just watching its home shatter to a thousand pieces. The murky water below was an opaque block, of which only faint ghost-like shadows of sea creatures could be seen.  With each wave, the fragile bodies of sea creature were thrown carelessly onto the surrounding shore and rocks.  Those that survived, has seemed to have lost all will to live; were too exhausted from fighting with the merciless waves to even desperately flap their limbs and fins. Up above, hiding in any sort of shelter from the ice-like winds they could find, were a flock of seagulls.  They had seemingly lost their way because of the greatly thick opaque clouds.  Despite, the vigorous, superior wind remained forcing everything out of its way, with no struggle shown – only complete ease. The boulders of clouds remained to loom over the coast like an overprotective mother over its misbehaving child.  No end was in sight; not a hint of the immensely powerful wind giving up any time soon. Or seemingly ever.  